Hi, I'm Bill Dudney,
the Application Frameworks Evangelist.
Smooth animation and fast
graphics performance are key
to creating a great app on iOS.
In this video,
you're going to learn about compositing
views with UIKit on iOS and see
some code that will help you achieve
smooth animation in your apps.
So let's get started.
Animation is intrinsic to
good user experience on iOS.
60 frames per second
is the gold standard.
That's where the application feels
natural under the user's finger.
It's where the elements on the
screen will move according to
the way the user wants them to.
But that doesn't give your
application much time.
It's about 16.67 milliseconds per frame.
And we have a lot of work to do.
First, your application has to do all
the calculations that are required
to get whatever data you're
displaying on the screen ready.
You might be showing users
first names and last names.
You might be showing icons.
All of those calculations that
go into creating or coming
up with which data should be
displayed have to be done first.
Next, you have to lay out the content
and draw whatever data you've
decided needs to be drawn.
And then that frame has to be rendered.
And that has to be done, again,
in 16 milliseconds.
So the bottom line is your
application cannot waste any time.
You want to prepare your content quickly.
If you're using a table view,
it's so important that you
reuse the table view cells.
We still see examples of
people forgetting to do this.
In 16 milliseconds,
you don't have time to be
allocating a new table view
cell every time one's required.
Also,
if you have more than one kind of table
view cell that's going to be displayed,
make sure that you just use
a different cell identifier.
When you go to dequeue
your reusable cell,
you can pass in different identifier
names and use a different identifier
for each different type of cell
instead of trying to lay each cell out
according to whatever the format is.
You also want to make sure
that you render quickly.
You want to simplify the
structure of your view hierarchy.
So if you have eight views on
screen and you can get by with four,
then please get by with four because
those extra views will add time
to each of those render passes.
Also, make sure to remove
unnecessary or invisible views.
If you have views that are
off-screen or aren't adding visual
content to the user interface,
they still will take time to render,
so make sure that we get
rid of those as well.
There are a lot of other things
that your application can do,
though,
to make your performance even better.
Before we go there, we need to talk about
how compositing works.
This is a screenshot of a
sample application that I wrote
to help explore these ideas.
It's a typical table view application.
On the left-hand side,
we see some image views.
On the right, we see two text fields.
And here we see one of these typical
table view cells blown out in a view
where we can see exactly what's going on.
We've got four views here,
the background view, the image view,
and those two text field cells.
Each one of those cells has
to be composited together and
placed into the table view.
And then each of the table view
cells have to be composited
together into the table view.
So here's another view
of what that looks like.
On the top, we have the four views again,
and they composite together.
And then each of those cells composite
together to make up the full table view.
Now, we sort of slowed it
down here in Keynote,
but every single frame
of your table view,
as you flick it, has to go through that
same set of operations,
compositing each frame of that animation.
Let's look at the table view
cell in a little more detail.
Again,
we have the image view off to the left.
And the two text fields on the right.
All three of these sub
views are marked as opaque.
And if you remember back when
we saw the animation of the
table view cell blown out,
there were some cutout areas in
the underlying UITableView cell.
Those cutouts don't have to be
written because we have these
opaque views over the top.
We'll look at that in more
detail in just a minute.
Let's talk about what it
takes to generate a frame.
Each frame of your application has
to go through these three steps.
It has to read pixels,
it has to write pixels,
and then it has to go through
at least one rendering pass.
The important thing for you to keep
in mind is that only a certain number
of operations can be achieved in that
magical 16 milliseconds that we have
to achieve our 60 frames per second.
Reading pixels requires that we take
every pixel from the source before
we can write it to the destination.
And if you try to read too many pixels,
your frame rate is going to suffer.
So here's an example.
We have this beautiful photo of
aspens with snow on the ground.
It's about a million pixels.
It's 1152 by 768.
We want to draw that in an area
that's roughly 70,000 pixels
at 240 pixels by 320 pixels.
That's essentially wasting 925,000
pixels worth of read bandwidth.
That's going to cost our frame rate.
Writing pixels requires that
every pixel on the screen has
to be written at least once.
If your application tries
to write too many pixels,
your frame rate again will suffer.
So we're back to our tree picture here,
and we have the word trees
over the top of our image.
And there's opacity around
that text field cell.
Every pixel that's inside that orange
boundary there has to be written twice.
Once to write the image
that's underneath it,
and then another time to do the math
to figure out how that transparent
orange color blends with the background.
The last thing your application has
to do is go through a rendering pass.
Some content needs to be rendered
into a separate buffer before
it can be rendered on screen.
And if you switch buffers too often,
your frame rate will suffer.
So we see here we've got this
image that has the beautiful
rounded rectangle corners on it.
It's a great effect.
If you use masking though,
that's going to require that image to
be rendered into an off-screen buffer.
We'll look at some strategies to
make this fast in just a moment.
In order to generate a shadow,
your application has to go
through another rendering pass.
To do that,
essentially what your application
has to do is render that image as
a gray square or whatever color
you have set as your shadow color.
It then causes a blur around the
edge of the image that it drew.
Then it has to place that
behind your image and composite
those two things together.
That gets done in that off-screen buffer,
which then gets composited
into the final screen.
So generating a frame has
a certain set of costs.
How many source pixels are you reading?
How many destination pixels
do you have to write out?
And how many buffers do
you have to render to?
The things to watch out for to see if
you're doing too much of any of those
three things is large source images,
alpha blended content,
and finally masking
and shadowing effects.
So let's talk about some
strategies to get your
application to write fewer pixels.
So here's our trees image again.
We have the trees text,
and remember each one of those
pixels that's inside that trees
text field has to be written twice.
If we go back to our table view cell,
we had each of those sub
views marked as opaque.
Since the underlying pixels
don't have to be written,
each of those pixels only
have to be written out once.
To reduce our writing bandwidth,
we need to go into instruments and check
that color blended layers checkbox.
When you do that,
you'll notice the UI of your iPhone
switch to this green and red overlay.
That shows you opaque regions
colored in green and transparent
regions colored in red.
The deeper the color of red,
the more blending is going on.
Fixing the problem is easy.
In Interface Builder,
you can just select your view and
then you check that opaque checkbox.
If you're building your
user interface via code,
you'd simply set your opaque
property on your view to be yes,
and that will cause that
view to be marked as opaque.
So once we mark everything as opaque,
we see we have a pure green screen,
except for the stuff that's showing
up on the bottom and on the top.
Since those pieces aren't animated
when we're flicking our table view,
they matter a lot less in terms
of the compositing performance.
Here's an example that I put
together just to see how far
I could tax the iPhone 4.
We see here on the right,
there are several text fields
that are marked as transparent.
Even with all this transparency,
the iPhone 4 still isn't very taxed.
But in your application, if you do this,
you'll be wasting power and CPU.
So you need to go through and check
your application and make sure that
all of the views that can be marked
as opaque are marked as opaque.
And that's writing bandwidth.
You want to minimize the
number of alpha-blended pixels.
It's really easy to do that.
You just set your Views
Opaque flag to Yes.
Only use transparency
if you really need it.
Now,
I don't want you to leave here thinking
that you shouldn't use transparency,
because you should.
It adds great effects
to your applications.
But in places like we saw in
that table view cell where the
background color is constant,
it's all white,
we can easily mark our text field
cells as opaque and set their
background color to white as well.
The user won't be able to tell the
difference if we have opaque or not,
other than the fact that
it will use more processor.
So you want to go into Instruments
and use that Color Blended Layers
checkbox to find out where you're using
transparency that you don't need to be.
Also, make sure that your opaque images
don't have an alpha channel,
because that alpha channel is what
Core Animation uses to determine
whether or not it should do
alpha blending with your images.
You can consider,
if performance is still an issue,
cutting up your views so that you have
opaque regions and non-opaque regions.
You would divide your view into
several subviews in order to do that.
If your view hierarchy is still
too complex or needs transparency,
consider drawing your
content with Quartz.
Now let's talk about
reading fewer pixels.
So each pixel that ends up
on the screen has to be red.
And here again we have
our beautiful Aspen photo.
And we're going to draw this roughly a
million pixels into this tiny little box.
We talked about earlier how
that's wasting read bandwidth.
There's also another issue of quality.
You notice here on the left hand
side where we've gone through the
default core animation scaling,
you see both in the image that's got the
sign on it and the image with the Aspens,
that both of those images
look rather pixelated.
Now I have blown them up so that
I could emphasize that effect.
But in your application,
your users will still
be able to see that.
It might not particularly
register what the issue is.
On the right hand side,
we see those same images
drawn with the same scale,
but using the quartz filtering instead
of the default core animation one.
And you notice that we can actually
tell that on that sign there's words.
And the Aspens also look really nice too.
They have a nice blurring effect.
From the user's perspective,
that will look a lot more natural
than the one that's pixelated.
On the left.
To identify your resized images,
you'll just go into
Core Animation Instrument again,
in the Instruments application,
and check this color misaligned images.
When you do that,
you'll see all your scaled images,
as we see here on the right,
colored with a yellow overlay.
To fix that, we're going to use Quartz,
also known as Core Graphics.
Core graphics sits underneath
UIKit along with core animation.
UIKit has most of what you need to
be able to build an application.
Core graphics though has a lot
of features that allow us to
do things like scaling images,
which we need to do now.
Here's some essential concepts that you
need to know about the way core graphics
works to be able to draw these images.
It's a full 2D graphic engine.
It's based on the PDF spec.
So just about anything you can
imagine being in a PDF can be drawn
programmatically using core graphics.
It's resolution and device independent,
meaning that we draw on
a scale based on points,
not on pixels.
Each of those units is a CG float,
so we can get very accurate in
terms of where we want things to be.
Keep in mind that a point
is not necessarily a pixel.
The origin on our canvas is
in the bottom left on iOS.
And that canvas is known as a CG context.
That context is the destination
for all of our drawing.
It holds a bunch of state like
the path that we want to draw,
how we want to fill that path,
what the stroke looks like,
what color we want to stroke it with,
even things like the dot pattern
that we want to use for our lines.
The number one take home point from
this is I want you to remember that
UIKit has most of what you need.
So you're going to be using
UIKit most of the time.
When you need to drop
down into core graphics,
you're going to probably want
to use UIKit objects to do the
heavy lifting and then get the
CG objects from those UIKit objects.
So for example, a UI color,
it has a method called CG color that
will return the core graphics color
object that that UI color wraps.
And the same thing with UI images.
If you have an instance of UI image,
you can ask it for its CG image
and that will return you the
underlying core graphics image that
you need to draw in core graphics.
In UIKit,
we use views to contain our drawing.
Behind those sit layers and layers get
their content in any number of ways.
The way we're going to use in our example
here is we're going to use delegation.
So we're going to become the delegate
of a CA layer and draw our content
with this method draw layer in context.
We could also subclass the layer by
creating a subclass called my layer
and implement the drawn context method.
The context that's
passed into this method,
draw layer in context,
is a CG context ref,
that destination for all of our drawing.
So here's the code that draws our image.
Initially,
what we're going to do is load the image,
potentially even in the background.
So we have a method.
It's abstract behind the scenes.
It might be doing all
sorts of crazy stuff.
We're just going to call that
method and say load the image.
Assuming we got an image back,
we're going to calculate our new size
that we want to draw that image at.
[Transcript missing]
You might be doing this
in your application.
What's happening behind the scenes though
is that's forcing Core Animation to send
your application to an off-screen buffer,
render it in that off-screen buffer,
and then bring that back
into the compositing scene.
To continue to get those beautiful
rounded corners but not pay the hit
rendering our content off-screen,
we're going to go back to Core Graphics.
In our Draw Layer in Context method,
we can take the rectangle that
defines the bounds of our layer
and use the UI Bezier Path class to
generate a path that has those rounded
corners for us and then set that
as the clipping path for our context.
Then when we tell that image, "Hey,
draw in this context," that the context
will take care of rounding those
corners for us and it won't have to
render it into an off-screen buffer.
So we'll continue to get that
beautiful look with the rounded edges.
But not pay that hit.
You could also decompose your rounded
corners into separate views or layers.
The point is to find a creative solution.
Look at what's going on in instruments,
figure out where your
performance problem lies,
and then look for ways to fix that.
Drop shadows also cause us to go
into an off-screen rendering pass.
We need a more efficient way
to generate those shadows.
One approach is to use the shadow
path property on CA layers.
That defines the opaque region
of the layer in which we want
to use to generate the shadow.
That also lets the compositor
cache the shadow bitmap in your
application so it can use it again
for each frame that it has to render.
And here's the code to do that.
You set up your layer, you set the shadow
properties on your layer,
and then you use a UI Bezier path and set
that as the shadow path on your layer.
And that's all there is to it.
So in summary,
you want to use this algorithm
to optimize your application.
While the frame rate is less than 60,
you want to first eliminate
additional rendering passes.
Remember the goal is to
have one rendering pass per
frame for your application.
Next, you want to reduce the read
bandwidth that you're using by using
the appropriately sized images,
and where you can't,
you want to use core graphics to
draw them at the smaller scale.
You also want to reduce
your write bandwidth by
eliminating unnecessary opacity.
So use your knowledge about the system
to build a better performing application.
Come up with creative solutions.
Look at what's going on with
instruments to find out where
your application is suffering,
and then apply the knowledge that
you've gained from this talk to help you
come up with those creative solutions.
Remember,
always use instruments to measure a
baseline so that you can tell what
a great difference you've made.
So there you have it.
We've covered compositing on iOS.
You've learned some tips
and tricks on how to achieve
smooth animation in your apps.
Now go fire up instruments and start
looking at the things we've talked about.
I'm looking forward to seeing
how you'll apply this information
to make your apps even better.